Less than an hour after the events of the second film, John Wick is now a marked man on the run in Manhattan. Before he is labeled "excommunicado" for the unauthorized killing of High Table member Santino D'Antonio, Wick travels to the New York Public Library to retrieve two concealed items – a "marker" medallion and a crucifix – but is injured in a fight with a giant assassin named Ernest. Wick seeks medical treatment from an underworld doctor, but he runs out of time before the doctor can finish. Wick finishes patching his own injury and, to protect the doctor from retaliation for helping him, shoots him twice to suggest he put up a fight. Upon leaving the doctor's office, John is found by a gang whom he kills in an antique weaponry store, and in a chase on horseback.

John meets with the Director, the head of the Ruska Roma. John presents the crucifix and requests safe passage to Casablanca. The Director reluctantly helps - as John is a former protégé and is from Belarus - knowing there will be repercussions. An Adjudicator of the High Table meets with Winston, the manager of the New York Continental, and the Bowery King, the leader of a network of vagrants. The Adjudicator punishes both for helping John, giving them seven days to resign their positions, and hires Zero, a Japanese ninja, as an enforcer. Zero and his students find the Director, slaughter her guards and stab her hands as punishment for helping John.

In Casablanca, John meets Sofia, a former friend and the manager of the Moroccan Continental. John presents her marker (from aiding her daughter) and requests to be directed to the Elder, the only person above the High Table. Sofia takes John to Berrada, her former boss, who tells John he may find the Elder by wandering through the desert until he cannot walk any longer. In exchange, Berrada asks for one of Sofia's dogs. When Sofia refuses, he shoots the dog, which is saved by a bullet-proof vest. Sofia tries to kill Berrada, but at John's warning she only wounds him. They fight their way out of the kasbah and drive into the desert, where she leaves him.

The Adjudicator and Zero confront the Bowery King, who refuses to abdicate his position. In response, Zero's students slaughter the Bowery King's henchmen while Zero cuts him seven times with a wakizashi as "penance".

Collapsing in the desert, John is brought to the Elder and states that he is desperate to live to "earn" the memory of the love he once had with his wife. The Elder agrees to forgive Wick on the condition that he assassinates Winston and keeps working for the High Table until his death. To show his commitment, John severs his ring finger and offers his wedding ring to the Elder. John returns to New York City and is attacked by Zero and his students before reaching the protection of the Continental. Winston urges John not to die as a killer but as a man who loved and was loved by his wife.

The Adjudicator arrives, but Winston refuses to resign his position and John refuses to kill him, leading the Adjudicator to revoke the "neutral ground" status of the Continental, and send Zero and heavily armed enforcers to kill John and Winston. Winston provides John with weapons and the assistance of Charon and his staff. After killing the enforcers, John is ambushed by Zero and his students, and John proceeds to kill all but the two students who were respectful towards him. John confronts and fatally wounds Zero.

The Adjudicator agrees to a parley with Winston, who explains his rebellion as a "show of strength" and offers fealty to the High Table. John arrives, and the Adjudicator asks what should be done with him. Winston shoots John repeatedly, and he falls off the roof. The Continental is "reconsecrated," but John's body has disappeared. A seriously injured John and his dog are delivered to a now badly-scarred Bowery King, who voices his anger with the High Table and asks John if he feels the same way, and John replies "Yeah."