In 1971, Roger and Carolyn Perron move into a farmhouse in Harrisville, Rhode Island, with their five daughters Andrea, Nancy, Christine, Cindy, and April. Their dog Sadie refuses to enter the house, and Nancy and Christine, while playing a game of "hide and clap", find a boarded-up entrance to the cellar.

Paranormal events occur within the first few nights: all of the clocks stop at exactly 3:07 AM, birds are flying into their windows, and Sadie is found dead in the backyard. One night, Christine encounters a malevolent spirit only she can see, prompting her to claim that the spirit wants her family dead. Another night, Carolyn hears clapping in the hallway. When she goes to investigate, she becomes trapped in the basement by the spirit. At the same moment, Andrea and Cindy are attacked in their bedroom by a spirit believed to be the one Christine encountered.

Carolyn decides to contact demonologists Ed and Lorraine Warren, who have recently investigated a possessed doll called Annabelle. The Warrens agree to take the case. They conduct an initial investigation and conclude that the house may require an exorcism, but they need authorization from the Catholic Church and further evidence before they can proceed. Ed and Lorraine discover that the house once belonged to an accused witch named Bathsheba Sherman (a relative of Mary Towne Eastey), who sacrificed her week-old child to the devil and killed herself in 1863 at 3:07 in the morning after cursing all who would take her land. They find reports of numerous murders and suicides in houses that were built on the property.

To gather evidence, Ed and Lorraine place cameras and bells around the house with the help of their assistant Drew Thomas and Harrisville police officer Brad Hamilton. One morning, as Ed, Drew, and Roger take the children out for ice cream, Bathsheba appears in Carolyn's room and vomits her blood into Carolyn's mouth, causing her to become fully possessed.

That night, the group sees Cindy sleepwalking into Andrea's room, and from the EVPs coming from the radio, they hear a spirit luring Cindy into the wardrobe, where she reveals a secret passage inside. Lorraine enters the passage and falls through the floorboards to the cellar, where she sees the spirit of a woman whom Bathsheba had long ago possessed and used to kill her child. The Perron family decides to take refuge at a motel while Ed and Lorraine take their evidence to Father Gordon, their liaison at the Catholic Church.

After the Warrens show their evidence to Father Gordon, he explains to them that the approval to perform the exorcism would have to come directly from the Vatican, since the Perron family aren't members of the church, but insists he will push it through himself so that they can get the approval as soon as possible. The Warrens' daughter Judy is attacked in their own home by Bathsheba utilizing Annabelle, though Ed and Lorraine arrive in time to save her. Carolyn, now possessed by Bathsheba, takes Christine and April back to the house.

Ed, Lorraine, and Brad find Carolyn in the cellar trying to stab Christine, with Roger and Drew preventing her from doing so. After tying Carolyn to a chair, Ed decides that an exorcism needs to be performed on Carolyn, but realizes that there is not enough time to wait for a priest to arrive. Ed decides to perform the exorcism himself, and in the process is attacked by Bathsheba. Though Carolyn escapes and attempts to kill April, Lorraine is able to distract Carolyn from killing her daughter by reminding her of a special memory she shared with her family, allowing Ed to complete the exorcism, saving Carolyn and April and lifting Bathsheba's curse forever.

Returning home, Lorraine tells Ed that they had been left a message stating that they had gained approval from the Vatican to perform the exorcism. They also have another case to investigate on Long Island. Before leaving, Ed adds a music box from the Perrons' house to a collection of items he and Lorraine have saved from past cases. It inexplicably opens and plays music.